Anopheles gene build
The purpose of this file is to store the maximum of information through the gene build process

1- pre-compute
Done
Pre compute available on the pre release web site:
+ RepeatMask
+ TRF
+ tRNAscan
+ CPG island
+ DUST
+ Dros pep blastX hits
+ Swall blastX hits
+ Snap genes
+ Genscan (using the arabidopsis matrix)

Comments: The small contigs where most of the sequence was masked produce an error on the blast output and were reported as failed jobs.

Snap has been much improved since the run has been done, exon lenght bug fixed, hmm model specific for anopheles. This hmm model has been produced with 790 EST transcripts. All of these transcripts containing 5', 3' UTRs (more than 3bp in lenght), start codon. 

1- Gene build strategy
+ Map all of the known genes to the genome (same assembly than release 2 but no transcripts overlapping 2 scaffolds will be allowed to then allow a change in the order or orientation of the scaffolds). A new version of genewise is used (rc6 serie). This new version of genewise allows to stretch the coding sequence to the closest methionine and stop codon. A specific anopheles splice site model has been build for anopheles with about 5000 splice site from est-genes. These genes will be in a later step combined with EST data to get the UTRs but let's call them Targetted genes. Are used all of the anopheles gambiae genes which are not labelled as fragment or transposons + all of the drosophila peptides release 3a.

+ Use the ~189 000  RNAs available (anopheles gambiae RNAs + Frank collins non submitted ESTs + submitted cDNAs??). Map tehm to the genome using exonerate (which version ???). Produce EST genes using the EST gene builder. 
Take all of the predicted ESTs which have more than 1 exon, have 3', 5' UTRS, methionine and stop codon. These genes will be later in the gene build process consider at the same level as Targetted genes. We will call these 'good' EST genes. Targetted estgenes. The remaining ones will be called estgenes.

+ Using the blast hits (Swall and dros-pep) where no targetted estgenes or targetted genes have been predicted we build genes by blast similarity. This main raise some problem as no close organism is available and edges exons are less conserved, we have to drastically drop the % of identity of the blast hit we allow through. This result in a huge stack of blast hits being used and endless computing. Hopefully Dan's filter code will this problem. There is also a lot of regions were one can observe a repetition of the same gene (real gene array or duplication coming from the assembly). 

+ Snap genes. Hopefully this ab-initio gene predictor trained on anopheles will allow us to find genes where nothing as previously been found. More tests need to be done to find out how we will use it. But there is great chances that if snap predict a gene where the above methods failed and this gene has at least one pfam domain, we will take it into the gene build.

+ Combine all of the above results with the gene combiner





