Mapping of Ensembl proteins to external databases

I-Purpose
Find the known genes and try to retrieve as much information as possible

II-Requirements
ensembl
bioperl-07
rd-utils (you can check this out from the ensembl cvs repository, this
contains pmatch binaries)

III-General strategy 2 different mapping are undertaken 
	   a-Direct mapping of Ensembl peptides against curated databases
	   containing the curated protein for the studied organism. For
	   human we use RefSeq proteins and Human SPTR.
	   
	   b-Secondary mapping (or called X_mapping). This will allow the
	   mapping of the curated database(s) to other databases. For
	   example for human this provides link to HUGO, LocusLink, ...

IV-How to run the mapping
	a-First fill in the mapping_conf file, this should be pretty
	straightforward.
	! All of the fields don't have specifically to be completed. The mapping is 
	organism specific and can be run without any pb only using SP files for example.
	If you need specific Xmapping (eg MGI for mouse) you can add your own options 
	in mapping_conf and modify get_Xmapping.pl script.
	
	b-If you need to fetch the specific SP sequences for the given
	organism run grep_sptr_entries.pl. It will also format the SP file
	in fasta format. But this script will retrieve only sequences from 
	one specific organism. If you can it is recommended to prepare the file
	yourself
        
        If you already have all of the files prepared you can
	run prepare_proteome.pl (perl prepare_proteome.pl), this will
	prepare the fasta file for pmatching.
	
	c-Run get_Xmapping.pl (perl get_Xmapping.pl), this will map the
	curated databases (SPTR or Refseq) to other databases. This external
	databases mapped will depend of the organism. eg for human (GO, HUGO,
	Locuslink, OMIM,...), mouse (MGI).
		

	d-Run pmatch.pl: perl pmatch.pl, pmatch.pl will run and postprocess the comparison
	of the protein from (SP/Refseq) and your protein file. Ok, pmatch.pl is currently a
	mess. I will rewrite it as soon as possible. A specific version of pmatch is currently
	needed to work with pmatch.pl, if needed contact me.
	
	e-Run maps2db.pl (perl maps2db.pl), this will take the result of
	both mappings and load everything into the database.
	This is the longest part of the process, it can take few hours to load... Humm, maybe
	something to improve.

	f-If you wish, there is a script get_stats.pl which produces some basic statistics.
	



If you have any problem, contact:
   Emmanuel Mongin (mongin@ebi.ac.uk)


